
🔹 What is AWS EC2?

Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) is a web service that provides resizable virtual servers (called instances) in the cloud.

 It’s one of the core services in AWS and is mainly used to run applications, host websites, process data, or even act as backend servers.

 🔹 Key Features of EC2

On-Demand Instances – Pay only for what you use, no upfront cost.

Variety of Instance Types – Optimized for compute, memory, storage, or GPU.

Elasticity – Scale up or down quickly based on traffic or workload.

Security – Integrated with IAM, VPC, and security groups for access control.

Storage Options – Attach EBS (Elastic Block Store), use ephemeral storage, or S3.

Custom AMIs – Create your own Amazon Machine Images with pre-installed software.

Networking – Assign Elastic IPs, private IPs, and configure load balancing.

Pricing Options – On-demand, Reserved, Spot, and Savings Plans.

🔹 Common EC2 Use Cases

Hosting web applications 

Running backend services or APIs

Deploying databases 

High-performance computing (HPC) and machine learning

Game servers or real-time applications

Development & testing environments

to connect to the instances u need ur .pem file which is key pair in which ur given when creating the instance

next u need use command my-key.pem ec2-user@13.126.49.49{with ur ip address} to connect use ubuntu instead of ec2-user if u given ubuntu

🔹 Steps to Launch an EC2 Instance

Login to AWS Console

Go to EC2 Service

Click Launch Instance

Choose:

AMI (Amazon Machine Image → OS like Ubuntu, Amazon Linux, Windows, etc.)

Instance Type (t2.micro, t3.medium, m5.large, etc.)

Key Pair (for SSH login)

Network & Security (VPC, subnets, security groups → open ports like 22 for SSH, 80 for HTTP)

Launch the instance

Connect via:

ssh -i my-key.pem ec2-user@<Public-IP>{in this case ubuntu}

Setup in VS Code

Install AWS CLI

Configure AWS CLI

Run:

aws configure


Enter:

AWS Access Key ID

AWS Secret Access Key

Default region (e.g. ap-south-1 for Mumbai)

Output format (json, table, or text)

These credentials come from IAM → Users → Security credentials → Access Keys.

3. Connect from VS Code Terminal
ssh -i my-key.pem ec2-user@<Public-IP>

to prevent the tfstate to be overwrite or to store when performed in github actions we created backend.tf
